{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.21.2508;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\f0\fs20 First a few questions about you and games:\par
\par
When did your interest in games start?\par
\par
-Since I picked up an SNES controller at my best friend in elementry school's place.\par
\par
What made you decide you wanted to design games?\par
\par
-My mom got me started on Visual Basic way back and I got to the point where I could make a graphic move around and I had this whole plan to make it shoot bullets at things but never finished it. I love making things whether its food, furniture or games.\par
\par
What are some of your favorite games?\par
\par
-Lately, I've been playing Dwarf Fortress far more than I should. Cave Story was what really got me started on the whole indy designer route. Just to list a few other games I've really enjoyed for one reason or another: La Mulana, Shadow of the Colossus, God Hand, Spelunky, Nikujin.\par
\par
Assuming you'd like to continue designing, what area of the games industry would you like to be a part of?\par
\par
-I'd like to avoid the industry if possible. I'm not fond of how any profit/sales oriented industry works. The effect of this really shows in the video game industry. I'm working hard now in hopes of avoiding this in the future. \par
\par
Do you have any other titles lined up?\par
\par
Yes, I had an idea and then kokomori announced its new theme for gamma4 and they just happen to be compatible so expect something for that. The game is called "Roulette". I'm also making a short series of retro arcade style games with my friend. The series is called "Tower Defense". It's a homage to the old arcade scene and a mashup of old and new conventions. It's been a very fun project to work on.\par
\par
Cave is very story focused, do you think you would want to work on a game that had little to no story?\par
\par
-The mindset I had going into designing Cave was to design a narrative that expands on the game medium to create a new unique narrative. My big grievance with commercial titles is how the narrative and gameplay are disjoint. Gameplay opens many new avenues for conveying narrative and meaning and most games do little to explore new avenues. The goal of Cave was to take the illusion of control and construct a story or experience that plays off the idea that the player is in control of the story. There is always a disjoint between the player's character's thoughts and what the player thinks his or her character is thinking and there is no reason these two need to coincide. Cave was exploring narrative possibilities using this idea of disjoint egos. The key to designing a good narrative for a game is interweaving gameplay and narrative. Referencing your question, this is why I'm not too fond of "experimental games" which focusing on designing novel core mechanics but rarely break any grounds in creating new narratives. I took a lot of inspiration from Stephen Lavelle's game which often create both a new core mechanic as well as design a narrative that exists through the core mechanic. A great example of this is Opera Omnia which I'm not ashamed to say is the inspiration behind the graphic style of Roulette.\par
\par
To answer your question though, I'm don't plan on comitting myself to any type of narrative or any type of game just yet. Consider a game like Nikujin (http://www.tigsource.com/articles/2007/06/11/nikujin) which gives hardly any "static narrative" (that is, narrative that is hard coded into a game, like a cutscene or text). Beyond being an incredibly well designed and balanced game, Nikujin makes you feel like a (naked) ninja invading a castle. The characters speak in babbles and the player is left to infer the actual dialog based on the action precedeing and proceeding that moment. No game has ever made me feel so awesome. Nikujin just enough setting for the player to tell the story. Nikujin is the most succesful use of emergent narrative that I've seen. I want to tell new stories in new ways, but I also want to tell good stories in good ways. If a game is good, it is worth its salt whether it is original or not.\par
\par
Cave could easily be thrown into the middle of the "games as art" argument.  What is your stance on this, do you believe games can be art?\par
\par
-This was a point of debate for myself for a while. The issue here is that games must bridge the gap between its gameplay and its meaning. If it does not, then the gameplay can only detract from the game as art. Lets consider the latest greatest hit of the mall, Call Of Duty 6. I have no idea what the game is really about because I have not played it and don't want to. But lets pretend I'm an expert on this game. So I'm playing this game and I'm like fighting some terrorists or something and experiencing the story of a modern soldier and it's fucking real because the graphics are so amazing. I get shot at a few times and my screen starts blinking red so I hide behind a rock where I auto-heal. I power through and kill another 10 terrorist before I accidentally throw a grenade against a wall and kill myself. No big deal right? I start over and this time I'm smart and I don't throw the grenade into a wall and instead I kill another 10 terrorist and keep powering through and save the captive family from the terrorists and I'm moved to tears. New technology has really allowed games to push into the border of realism where there is so much artistic potential. If the art behind Call of Duty was to recreate the feeling of being a soldier then it succeeds in recreating the look but fails because it needs to be a fun game at the same time. Why does one respawn? So players wont have to replay the game. Why does one heal over time? So players wont die too often. Such artifacts constantly cut away from the visual narrative. Call of Duty tries to tell the story of a modern soldier and tries to be a game at the same time and consequently fails at both.\par
\par
So do I believe games can be art? The contention here of course is the definition of game and art. Let me offer a thought on what is not art. If a game promises more than it can deliver than it is not art. If not every decision made when designing a game has relevence to the meaning of the game, than it is not art. Call of Duty wants to be real but it fails in so many places that are more than just due to techincal limitations (the limitations of the medium shall we say). But if we consider a game like Serious Sam that gives (blasting aliens with rocket launchers) exactly what it promises (blasting aliens with rocket launchers). Can we consider such games that satire their own medium as art? Then we have games like Jason Rohrer's Passage and Cactus's Life is a Race which both say something profound about life through being played. These games NEED to be games to say what they are saying. To me, they must be art, but in their briefness we question whether they are even games. Finally we must consider games like La Mulana (in all its modesty) paint the remnants and history of a vast world for us to explore and interact with or a game like Cave Story which invites us to be the hero of a heartfelt fairy tale. For me, the act of playing is not art, but the impression these games leave on us is.\par
\par
I think I've babbled long enough on this topic.\par
\par
\par
\par
\par
Now a few questions about the game:\par
\par
Is this your first game?\par
\par
-It's my first game that I can call complete. \par
\par
Was this a project that you did on your own?\par
\par
-I tried to get my friend to program it but he said he did not want to do a platformer yet so I just went ahead and did it myself. I did all the design and artwork too. For sound, I used SFXR (http://www.drpetter.se/project_sfxr.html) for everything. I tried making some screaming and grunting sounds with a mic but that did not turn out well. It was pretty fun doing the whole thing. I spent about three months on it. Hopefully, my next endeavor will come about much faster now that I have that much more experience.\par
\par
What came first, the type of game or the story?\par
\par
-The type of narrative came first. Then I designed the settings and the characters and eventually the story in that order.\par
\par
What genre would you put Cave into?\par
\par
A platformer? Not really ha ha. I do not know. The thought never ocurred to me. The current convention for typing video games by genres only clasify a very unspecific set of core mechanics.\par
\par
Was the choice to have no music a design choice or a technical one?\par
\par
-Music is an interesting beast. Everyone knows the power music can have in creating atmosphere. But rarely does music ever "exist" in the space the game takes place in and becomes this artifact in the setting that people never ask questions about. For Cave, I feel silence complements the lonliness and claustrophobia better than music could. Music is certainly something I'll consider exploring in future games though.\par
\par
You suggest people play the game in fullscreen mode, why is that?\par
\par
-Aesthetically, all games do better in fullscreen with the exception of maybe desktop sheeps and RaRa Racer. I felt it was particularly important for Cave to create a feeling of being stuck in a dark cave rather playing a game in a window hovering over some brightly colored window. Of course, players are free to choose their own experiences as they will. \par
\par
Are you concerned about people who don't play your game and assume it's similar to another indie title Cave Story?\par
\par
-The title is a homage to Cave Story so it's okay if people get that impression when they read the title. I think the gameplay distinguishes itself from Cave Story immedietely enough that this is not an issue for anyone who plays the game. The title is also a pun for anyone who can figure it out.\par
\f1\par
\par
\par
\par
\f0 These questions go a bit deeper into the game and may be considered a bit too revealing, again, if you feel some things could be kept secret, just let me know:\par
\par
The page for Cave on the IGF site has probably the shortest description out of all the titles:  "A boy and a girl exploring a cave."  Even your website just has the logo for the game.  Why did you decide to be so minimalist?\par
\par
I was a bit conflicted about this decision. It always bothers me a little bit when the author of a game puts the game out complete with its own Cliff Notes. I feel the only time when something should be explained is when it inloves some reference that players can not be reasonably expected to know (for example, some cultural practice, or some personal experience). The game should really speak for itself. Of course, its always a battle between the audience and the author. Especially for an author who has no reputation, there is little incentive for players delve deeper. I feel Cave can speak for itself if the players are willing to spend the time to read into it. I had hoped that there'd be enough of a community talking about Cave to interpret everything there is in the game but this has not happened yet. In retrospect, this might not have been the best decision for myself given my reputation (or lack thereof). Everyone I've talked to who have played my game have a much better appreciation for it after I explain it to them.\par
\par
With that in mind, I think this is a good point to briefly synopsize what the game is really about and try not to sound like a pervert. The narrative is a metaphor the first time a teenage couple have sexual intercourse. The style should be loosely reminiscent of those older coming of age movies. Specifically, the game is about a boy and a girl exploring a cave... and the consequences related to that for each character.\par
\par
The game derives its meaning from metaphor. Cave suggests there at this  alternative interpretations using pun (as I mentioned already). A female acquaintance of mine played the game for about 10 seconds before remarking to me "Peter! This game is sexist!" The difference between the boy and the girl's movement are there to suggest a distinction in gender representation in the narrative and also to satire gender representation in video games in general. The boy moves like any other video game character. He moves fast, jumps absurdly high, and does not need to recover after falling. The girl moves much more realistically to the point of annoyance. She must climb on top of things that are waist high, moves slowly, and has to light her way through the dark cave and crawl through narrow tunnels. \par
\par
More details later.\par
\par
Why were there spikes in the game?  You respawn very close to where you die, so what made you decide death was necessary?\par
\par
When the boy dies and you respawn, if you go by the spikes you fell on, all that is left is blood.  When the girl dies her body always remains, and if you die multiples times, multiple bodies are left.  Was there a reason behind that?\par
\par
-Death is another big gripe that I have about games. Death is such a powerful narrative element and is almost always underplayed in games to facilitate visceral entertainment, playability and sales. If death is going to play any part in any game, then there needs to be a reason. The ironic consequences of death in games have been pointed out satirical in games like (almost all of) Jesse Venbrux's game and Raitendo's  Free Will and You Only Live Once. \par
\par
Repeating myself a little bit here: Death is a narrative artifact needed for gameplay. A shooting game is not challenging if the player can't die, and not fun if there are no enemies to shoot. With games with realistic graphics that are literally trying to look real, this artifact becomes more and more apparent as real graphics create a stronger assosciation with the game and the real world and its physical laws. I think the real solution here though is that there needs to be less games about killing things. \par
\par
I can not say Cave uses death with quite as much wit as Cactus's Life is a Race, or with quite as much emotion as Jason Rohrer's Passage. Adding death into the game was to give myself more flexibility in designing the narrative. The girl leaves her corpse behind to suggest a permanence in her death, while the guy just leaves a smatter of blood (because it's cool and all) but gets right back up and keeps going with no other sign that he is dead or injured at all. For the girl, death is symbolic loss of chastity. When the girl dies, she loses part of herself which takes the form of a corpse that does not go away. In contrast, the boy does not leave a corpse behind to suggest that there are no consequences to his actions. For the boy, death is symbolic of quite literally, nothing. \par
\par
Occasionally the characters will, for lack of a better description, pick up a "note," and those "notes" seem to correlate to thoughts they have about each other.  Why did you decide these "notes" should be lying around instead of the characters just speaking at certain check points?\par
\par
-The "notes" are actually intended to be pieces of the other character's clothing (to further hint at the meaning of the game). The only thing that suggests this is the color of the clothing which matches the color of the other players clothing (i.e. the girl finds blue and brown clothes and the guy finds red and cyan clothes). It was intentional that this fact not be too explicit. \par
\par
For a while, the game did not have the dialog at all. I added the dialog for two reasons. First, to give a sense of goal and reason for players being in the cave, and second, to suggest at the meaning behind Cave by establishing the background and thoughts of the two characters. I had at least one person say they preferred the game without the notes, and one person say that the game needed more to suggest at its meaning. I'm undecided myself.\par
\par
There was at least one note that I had to go out of my way to find.  Was there a reason for not putting some notes along the path?\par
\par
-There are actually two such messages that are hidden. They both contain messages that are a little more suggestive of the boy's concious. Again, there was a line that needed to be drawn as to how much is spelt out for the player and how much is left for the player to discover and interpret themselves. I feel the hidden messages complement the idea that there is more to the game then meets the eye.\par
\par
One of the most interesting moments of the game is when, without picking up one of the notes, the text "I want her" appears in front of the boy before a platforming segment.  If you fail during it and respawn the text "harder" appears and then "harder..."  Nothing else similar to that appears in the game.  What was the reasoning behind that?\par
\par
-I'd hate to spoil this one. Again, it's a pun in the same sense that the title is a pun. Consider the shape of the section that follows where the text appears and what happens there and what dying physically represents during this part. Suffice to say, I took a little inspiration from Miroslav Malesevic's I Love You series http://pqgames.wordpress.com/my-games/i-love-you-2/. Of course Cave is a little more subtle with its metaphors.\par
\par
There are two sections in the game where the boy lights a row of candles.  Is there any significance behind this?\par
\par
-See above for the first set of torches. The second set was intended to complement the disruption of the players control over the character at the "climax" of the game. At this point in the game, another girl appears. The boy does not know that this is not the same girl he entered the Cave with but the player is aware of this fact. The girl, the boy, the second girl, and the player's knowledge do not overlap. The idea for this part was to reverse the role of the player and the game. Until this point, the player plays the game, but when the second girl appears, the game in some sense is playing and testing the player. What the player assumes to be true at this point is flipped upside down. \par
\par
On a deeper level, the meaning of the second girl can be read as such: Her death is symbolic of the commitment of her body. The player does not choose whether the girl lives or dies because the girl has no choice but to commit herself in a physical relationship. The boy on the other hand has a choice to commit himself and this choice becomes the player's choice. If he chooses to commit himself by jumping into the pit, the boy must take the same path through the game that the girl did representing the idea that the boy must go through the same challenges as the girl did.\par
\par
Is there any meaning behind the symbol near the end of the game that looks like an arrow pointing down? \par
\par
-If you look carefully, you will see that it represents the bonding of male and female if you know what I mean.\par
\par
Do you know anybody who has actually got the good ending first, and not by accident?\par
\par
For a while, this was a pretty big issue. Everyone was getting the good ending. I made some design changes which would incline/force players to get the bad ending first. Certainly, some people still get the good ending on their first playthrough, but that's not a huge deal. It's interesting to consider how this can affect one's interpretation and experience of the game, but I have nothing to say about this yet. In any case, if I wanted full control of a player's experience I'd have made "Cave the movie".\par
\par
Does it bother you that of those who have seen both endings, most people prefer the "bad" ending?\par
\par
-Not at all. I wanted to suggest there is no distinction between the bad and good ending for the boy. Hence, as the boy in the game sees it, the bad and good ending are identical. It is the player that must realize the implications of the bad and good ending and make a judgment for themselves. I also did design the bad ending to be a little more entertaining than the good ending because that's how it is in real life sometimes (not to suggest I support such things).\par
\par
To your knowledge, has everything in the game been discovered?\par
\par
-The two messages I mentioned earlier are the only hidden things in the game. You can also crush the guy if you close a door while he is standing under it (actually, this was causing an infinite loop hit collision bug that I conveniently used to my advantage). There's also a fun message for anyone who messes with my source code and turns on the level editor but that's not canonical at all.\par
\par
Finally, what would you like to have players get out of the game?\par
\par
-I hope players will be enjoy interpreting the different meanings of gameplay and realize there's more than one way to tell a story in a game.\par
\par
Again thanks for your time, enjoy your day.\par
\par
-Mike E.\par
\f1\par
}
 